Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Quil Kukle. They are
professor of philosophy at Georgetown University and a visiting
fellow at Leibniz University Hanover. And today we're going
to talk about their book, Sex Beyond Yes, Pleasure
and Agency for Everyone. So Doctor Kuklo, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks, I'm happy to be here.
OK, so before we get into the actual topic
of the book, I would like to start by
asking you perhaps a few general questions just for
the audience to get acquainted with uh what we're
going to talk about here today. So, what is
sexual ethics?
Yeah, I mean, that's an interesting question. I'm not
sure I believe in sexual ethics, if that means
like a set of ethical principles for how we're
supposed to have sex. Um, BUT when I talk
about ethical sex, I just mean very simply. Sex
where no one is wronged and everyone is treated
respectfully. My basic interest is in good sex, but
I think that for sex to be good, it
has to be ethical in that sense. It has
to not be a violation or a wronging of
anybody. That's, that's my pretty minimal definition.
Mhm. And what is sexual agency? I mean, what
does agency mean in this particular context?
Um, SO agency for me more generally is action
that is self-determining and self-expressive. I like the word
agency better than the word autonomy because I think
that when people hear autonomy, they think about somebody
sort of making a fully independent decision completely voluntarily
without any context. Whereas uh a major theme in
this book and just in my work in general
is that To have agency, you often need to
be supported by other people and by the environment.
It's not something you have by yourself. It's something
you have when you have the right kind of
support to act with self-determination and self-expression. So that's
really what I care about. So sexual agency is
just agency in the domain of sex, and I
care about people being able to have sex in
a way that is self-determining and self-expressive rather than
hijacked by other people's desires or conception of what
that sex is supposed to be.
So, uh, when it comes to sexual pleasure, I,
I mean, I, I need to ask you this
question because I, I have tons of interviews with
philosophers and many times what perhaps for most people
seems to be obvious and common sense for philos.
Philosophers, I mean, it gets more complicated. So, uh,
uh, what constitutes sexual pleasure, actually?
I, I actually, I'm not surprised that philosophers get
tripped up on that one because I think it's
a really hard question. So, um, just to sort
of move back one step and talk about what
good sex is for me, right? Like when I
talk about good sex, I mean sex that everybody
involved wants and finds fun and pleasurable, right? So
before we get to what sexual pleasure is, I
just want to point out that sex could be
ethical but not good, right? Like you could do
everything right and not harm anybody. Um, BUT it
could just turn out to be not that fun
or not that pleasurable, right? So good sex has
to be both ethical and pleasurable. But when it
comes to what constitutes sexual pleasure, I don't think
anyone is very good at drawing a bright line
between sexual pleasure and other kinds of pleasure. It's
very, very hard to say which pleasures count as
sexual. Um, WHEN my kid was really little, They
once defined sex to me. They were like 8
years old, and I asked them what they thought
sex was, and they said sex is um when
people who like each other play with each other's
bodies for fun, including the private parts, which I
thought was a actually kind of a really nice
definition of sex, didn't have anything to do with
reproduction or anything like that. Um, AND so for
me, I guess sexual pleasure, the best I can
do drawing on that is to say, it's like
the pleasure we get from intimate play with bodies.
Um, BUT that's, of course, imperfect because, you know,
when you dance with somebody, that's also could be
pleasure from intimate play with bodies. Um, AND I'm
not sure that there's a bright line as to
what makes it sexual, but I am comfortable saying
that when we do think of pleasure as sexual,
it does involve this kind of playful intimacies of
the body. And beyond that, I don't think it's
one of these concepts that has Nice, neat definitions.
It's a bit of a messy concept.
Right. So, um, I, I mean, of course, er,
we have to talk here and we're going to
talk here about consent because it's something that people
care a lot about and I think for a
very good reasons, but in the book you go,
um, you explore that question in very particular ways,
but first of all, what is consent? I mean,
is it easy to define it?
Yeah, um. Uh, ODDLY, you're gonna be surprised to
hear that unlike with sexual pleasure, for my purposes,
I think consent is very easy to define, and
I think that part of the problem in a
lot of the work that's been done on philosophy
of sex is that people make consent, try to
do something much bigger and more complicated. Then it
should really do right. So for me, I'm really
glad you asked this question because it's a really
important point for me. So for me, like consent
and agency are not the same, and consent and
consensuality are also not the same. I try to
keep consent very simple. I want to use consent
the same way we use it in the rest
of everyday life. So consent is agreeing. To a
request or an offer that somebody makes, right? And
this is how we use it everywhere. When we
consent to medical treatment or when we consent to
the, you know, our cell phone plan terms of
service, or when we consent to, you know, the
terms of our lease, we don't usually act like
it's a very fancy notion, right? Somebody asks you
to do something and you say, OK, and now
you've consented. Um, BUT that's not a notion that
I think is actually that interesting in the domain
of sex. I don't think we do this very
often in sex, and that's fine. You know, sex
where one person is like, hey, can we have
sex? And the other person is like, Yes, we
can. It's, it's usually not the best or the
most exciting sex. It's not usually how sex starts
when it's good. So I really de-emphasize consent in
that sense. However, Consensuality, consensual sex, that's different for
me, and that is very important, right? So for
me, consensual sex as opposed to the act of
consent is sex where everybody involved is communicatively making
it clear either through their body or words or
however to everyone else involved that they're into it,
that they wanna do it. And they're also making
clear that they are paying attention to the fact
that others are into it and want to do
it. And everybody is making clear that they're going
to stop if anyone stops wanting to do it,
right? And that's kind of an ongoing tissue of
communication, sometimes involving words, sometimes involving eye contact, sometimes
involving gesture. That involves us like constantly making clear
to one another that we're all here because we
want to be and we all are ready to
stop if somebody doesn't want to be doing it
anymore. That I think is really key to ethical
sex. But that might not involve any actual moment
of consent where somebody is like, may I have
sex with you? Yes, you may, right? That part
might not happen, but the consensuality is still super
important for me. Does that make, does that makes
sense,
right? Uh, YES, I think it makes sense, but,
but then, so when it comes to sex, consensuality
in your understanding is sort of an ongoing process,
correct.
Yes, it's ongoing and it's an ethical requirement for
sex. I noticed, and I think this is important,
that it's, it's not enough to necessarily make sex
good because you could be communicating that you are
definitely like, you know. Choosing to do something and
wanting to do it, but you could be doing
that for very bad reasons, right? Like you might
be. Consensually having sex because you grew up thinking
it was your duty to have sex with your
husband whenever he wants it or for any number
of bad reasons, right? And you might be doing
it consensually and not enjoying it at all. Like
when I go to the grocery store, nobody's forcing
me to do it. I'm doing it consensually, but
it's not fun or pleasurable. I still hate it.
Um, SO consensuality of that sort for me is
like a really important minimum ethical requirement for sex,
but it shouldn't be confused with either sexual agency
or sexual pleasure, with both of which require more
as far as I'm concerned.
But do you think that it might be uh
what's the word I'm going to use here, uh,
limiting at least uh the fact that uh legally
and socially when it comes to sex we focus
on consent and not so much on consensuality.
Yes, I think it's extremely limiting. Although I'm going
to be honest with you. So I'll give you
a better answer to this than this. But I'm
going to be honest with you that in the
domain of law, I don't really know how to
do any better because I don't know how to
codify this because it is. Involves complicated human interaction
and human and communication, and I don't think the
law is capable of dealing with complicated human interaction
and communication. So I don't know what to do
about the law case, but I do think it's
very limiting because, um, I mean people like talking
about consent because it's like it's very simple, right?
It's like you just give people the message like.
Men are supposed to, it's also tends to be
very heterosexual and very sexist. It's like men are
supposed to ask. You're not supposed to do it
without asking, and women get to say yes or
no. That's a simple rule, right? But it's based
on this very bad simplistic sexist picture of sex,
which I think is inadequate in many ways. And
it's a picture where like men are the ones
who ask for sex. Women are the ones who
either consent or refuse, and Maybe more importantly for
this conversation, if you just focus on consent, it,
it doesn't leave much room for any interest. And
what happens after that, like what kind of sex
you're gonna have? How do we make it good?
How do we make it interesting? When should it
end? How do we know when it should end?
None of that stuff gets talked about. All people
talk about is like, did you get a yes
or did you get a no? And we don't
have any tools for talking about it after that.
And it makes us imagine sex as just about
men trying to win a yes out of women
somehow. It buys into what I in the book
call an extractive commodity model of sex, where sex
is like just this thing and it's a thing
that men want and women have, and men and
women kind of barter over it like a contract
and try to figure out whether the woman is
willing to give it up. And That's, um, I
think it's. It's a bad model for men because
they're always trying to like get sex out of
women. It's a bad model for women because they're
supposed to somehow like not really want it and
try to hold on to it. And again, most
importantly, even aside from that, it just doesn't tell
us anything about how to make sex good. The
most it tells us is like, how to not
rape people, right? But it doesn't tell us anything
about how we should be setting up the world
or talking to each other in such a way
that we are having good, pleasurable, agential sex. So
yeah, I think it's very, very limiting. The problem
is when it comes to the law. If there's,
you know, if somebody is accused of sexual assault
or, um, or of rape, there's not much to
look at other than did the person agree to
it, right? It's very hard to Get all of
that rich conversation about good sex into any kind
of legal framework.
Uh, WHEN you say it's, uh, the, the, the
way we approach, uh, sex or the kind of
sexual norms that we have in or that we
tend to have in our societies that they are
sexist, uh, I mean, could you explain that a
little bit more? Is it because those kinds of
sexual norms put women in a sort of a
passive position? Is that it?
Yeah, uh, that's half of it. Um, YOU know,
women are in a, in a path. So, you
know, if your model is a consent model where
it's assumed that men are doing the asking and
women are doing the consenting, which is almost always
what's assumed. Um, THEN sexual agency for women, like
self-determination and self-expression for women becomes this incredibly narrow
thing, which is like the most agency you get
to have is agreeing to something that somebody else
suggested, right? It's a very minimal kind of sexual
agency.
It doesn't, it's like you, you're not expected to.
Pursue it actively,
right? Well, not only not to pursue it actively,
but not to have opinions about like what you'd
like to do, what, what your fantasies are, what
kinds of things you want, what your limits are,
what you'd like to explore, like all of that
gets lost. But I also think it's sexist in
the sense, just as importantly, it's sexist in the
sense that it hurts men. Because it puts men
in this position where they're always supposed to want
sex, and their job is just to like, try
to get it by like asking in the right
way or offering the right thing. And so men
are also not allowed to have any sexual imagination.
About like, what kind of thing they want or
the subtleties of that. They're just supposed to try
to like get women to agree to sex. And
they are also not really allowed to have any
limits on this model. They're not allowed to be
the ones who are just like, not interested in
sex or have certain limits about what they want
to do. So I think it really just narrows
agency dramatically for both men and women. Um. It's
sexist in the sense that it has a very
unequal perception of men's and women's roles in sex,
but I, I don't think it's sexist in the
sense that it harms women more. I think it's
just a bad model that gives nobody very much
agency or room for sexual imagination. It's also, I
want to just point this out, like it's not
even sexy, right? Usually when you're actually having like
a sexy flirty leading up to sex with people,
you're not just like asking them to do stuff
for you. Like that's a kind of an unsexy
way of starting to sex to be like, will
you have sex with me? Yes or no. It's
not, it's not really great sex, right? Um, SO
I don't, I don't even think it's like a
good model of like how to make things fun.
And um if I have time for just one
more point about this because it is actually something
very close to my heart, I think it's a
mistake that analytic philosophers who talk about sex make
all the time and don't even notice. There's a
sort of a, a dominant model of consent in
analytic philosophy. It's not even specific to sex, just
in general. Where consent is understood as giving up
your standing right to not have something done to
you, right? So analytic philosophers will talk about consent
as giving somebody permission to do something to you
or take something from you that they normally wouldn't
have had a right to. And I feel like
this idea that like, the way we start sex
is by agreeing to give something up or agreeing
to like give up our right and let somebody
do something to us. It's just very grim. It
doesn't sound very fun. You know, I'd rather think
that sex starts with two people being like, You
know, again, through both their bodies and their words,
sort of jointly figuring out what would be fun
for both of them to do, not being like,
OK, you have the right to trespass my body.
Go ahead. I will let you do this thing
that you're normally not allowed to do. It's a
very bleak picture of sex, the consent model, I
think. Mhm.
So, but I, I mean, I know, of course,
there are many different kinds of sexual expression, many
different kinds of sexual activities that people can have.
Of course, I, I mean, I mean, probably all
of them would require, uh, much more than just
a simple Yes or no to initiate sex, but,
uh, uh, do you think that there are particular
kinds of situations or contexts where sexual agency really
requires much more than the ability to just say
yes or no?
Um, I, I guess I think that It always
does, um, so the closest we get to a
setting where Sexual agency involves this kind of contractual
just yes or no situation is if you're, I
mean, I can think of a few times, a
few cases like one would be in a super
like literally contractual setting like sex work maybe where
you know the person either agrees to what is
proposed in the context of a business deal or
they don't. Um, OR sometimes in the context of
like a very long term relationship where you've kind
of fallen into a rut and you know what
you're gonna do and you know what the other
person more or less expects, and you just get
to a point in your relationship where you're like,
yeah, sex tonight, yes or no, you know, um,
that can happen after a long time. But I
think like, first of all, neither of those is
our model for fantastic sex, but also Both of
those, when they are OK, are only OK because
they're against a background of better agency than that
and better communication than that, right? Like the reason
that a sex worker might be able to just
have that kind of contractual relationship and not have
it be a problem for their agency. IS because
outside of that, they already have all other, all
these other kinds of agency, right? They can leave
sex work if they want to, they can turn
down a client if they want to, they can
do other things. If they don't already have all
kinds of other agency, then we don't think that
that sort of yes, no situation is OK. And
it's the same for the long-term couple. We would
hope that Their comfort with each other and their
ability to just like negotiate sex with a yes
or a no comes from a background, ideally of
much more agency than that, right? You know, and
a history of being able to do other things
and communicate well and understand each other. So I
think that sexual agency always requires more than just
the ability to say yes or no, but there
are specific contexts within that when maybe sometimes yes
or no is enough, but only because there's all
sorts of other understandings and supports on board, if
that makes sense. I think that like, you know,
if you imagine just a setting where somebody walks
up to somebody randomly is on the, on the
street and it's like sex, yes or no. It's,
it's never gonna be, that's never gonna be OK,
right? It, it's gotta be in some broader context
that supports agency no matter what.
Right. And in your book you explore some uh
situations and specific cases where, uh, I mean, uh,
the, these exploration of consent and consensuality are perhaps
more complicated. So, uh, what do you make of
cases where people have sex while they're drunk or
high?
Yeah, this is a great question. Um, IF it's
OK to loop back for just a second, I
realized there's something that I didn't say just now
when you asked me about the yes or no
sex, which I, which I think is pretty important.
Which is even in the cases that I talked
about, like if it's in the case of contractual
sex work or a long-term relationship or something where
it looks like yes or no is enough, even
in those cases, You don't really have any meaningful
sexual agency unless you also have the ability to
sort of adjust what's happening as you go and
put, you know, establish some limits, point out that
something else would be better, and very importantly, to
like end the situation when you want to easily
and without any kind of social or physical punishment.
So even if it looks like it's just yes
or no. A lot more is required for it
to be agential, right? Like you could say yes
to something, but if you're saying yes, means that
you're stuck with it for as long as the
other person wants to go, no matter what they
do to you, then that's not agency, right? So
even in those cases, we need more out of
agency. But sorry, to get back to your point
about drunk high sex, this is a really interesting
topic for me. Um, SO a big theme of
the book is that, and actually not just the
book, a big theme of so much of my
work is that, um, The idea of like perfect
agency is a myth. Um, AND it's a myth
that shouldn't even be an ideal for us because
we're all imperfect, finite, vulnerable beings who are constrained
by our circumstances and dependent on other people. This
is something that I really have taken to heart
from also doing a lot of work in disability
studies. It's not a point about disability per se.
But within disability studies, there's a real emphasis on
the fact that all humans are, you know, imperfect
and vulnerable and never perfectly autonomous or perfectly independent.
And I think a realistic picture of agency is
not about trying to make people perfectly autonomous. It's
about understanding that Our agency is always partial and
then figuring out how to support one another as
best we can within that, right? So, having said
that, The fact that being a little bit drunk
or a little bit high compromises our autonomy a
little bit, compromises our agency a little bit, to
me does not mean that Sex is a no
go or that, 00 well, now the person doesn't
have perfect agency, so we're done. I think that's
just realistically how most of us have sex. And
I also think that Trying to get rid of
all drunk, uh sorry, all drunk sex or all
high sex would be just like a completely useless
proposition because it's so entrenched in our culture that,
you know, we go out to dinner, we have
a couple glasses of wine, and then we go
home and we have sex or we're hanging around
with our friend and have, you know, we That's
just the fabric of our social life. And some
people don't do any of that, and that's fine,
but to get rid of all of it is
totally unrealistic. So for me, the question is not,
um, how do we prevent people from having sex
when they're drunk and high. The question is, how
much is too much, and if somebody's just like
a little tipsy or a little high, how can
we make sure that that sex is still supported
enough to be sufficiently agential? And to me that
means things like If you and your partner are
both having some drinks, make sure that you can
still be having a complicated, coherent conversation as you
go, you know, like if you, if, if when
you are a little bit drunk, you start having
sex with somebody and you're just like, sex, yes
or no? And they're like, yup, then you really
have good reason to worry. Like, did they really
consent to it? Were they in their right mind?
Who knows? But if as you're having sex with
the person, You're like checking in with them. You're
being like, does this feel good? Do you wanna
do something slightly different? What are your fantasies? You
know, um, what would you most like to get
out of this evening? If both of you are
able to like really have that kind of coherent
conversation, first of all, that's a good sign you're
probably not too drunk to have sex, but also
it's a way of sort of offering support for
the other person's slightly impaired agency, you know, and
holding them in their ability to still be reflective
about what they're doing and understanding what they're doing.
So I think, you know, obviously if you're staggering,
blackout drunk, or like disconnected from reality, high, you
shouldn't be having sex. You can't have a genial
sex under those circumstances. But if you're a little
tipsy or a little high and you're constantly in
good communication with your partner and checking in, To
me, that's both making sure that you're not too
high and it's at the same time, helping the
other person stay grounded in what they really want
and in the social interaction and so on. So
that's where my emphasis is, like, ways of making
sure it hasn't Gone too far and ways of
making sure that we're helping people be agential. Another
thing that's really important is things like is like
your material circumstances like can you go home? So
I think one problem that happens when people have
sex when they're a little bit drunk is if
they're in a place where their only option for
leaving is to drive home and you shouldn't be
driving when you're a little bit drunk. You can
be trapped in the situation, right? And not actually
really be able to say no or or stop
it because you can't leave. Um, SO, part, I
mean, I always like to move the emphasis from
individuals to the situation. To me, part of what
makes drunk or high sex possible are really basic
things like 24 hour public transportation. It's just like
the ability to leave when you need to, the
ability to have freedom, the ability to not feel
like you're financially dependent on this person, or like
your career is dependent on this person, or your
ability to physically get home is dependent on this
person. All of this can help us have a
genuinely pleasurable agential sex, even when we are a
little bit compromised. But again, because I don't want
anybody thinking I'm saying something horrible, not to compromise,
you know, if you can't form a coherent sentence
and you don't know what you're doing, then I
think sex should be off the table.
No, but you touched on a point there that
I was wanting to explore a little bit later,
but let's explore it now. So, you said that
it's better if people, of course, can leave the
situation if they are not, for example, financially dependent
or if it doesn't involve a. Situation where uh
there's sort of uh I guess a power dynamic
where's also some sort of oppression over the person
or some some sort of coercion for uh her
to have sex. Uh, I mean, what, how do
you approach those kinds of situations?
Yeah, well, I mean, I do think this is
a good time for us to talk about that
because my approach to that is very similar to
my approach to the drunken high case in the
sense that I think this ideal of perfect freedom
and no power inequality is unrealistic, right? I think
that when people say, oh, you can't have sex
if there's a power inequality or you can't have
sex if there's any oppression. They're thinking of like
very stark cases, right? Like they're thinking of a
very sexist um relationship where the man is completely
controlling over the woman or you're, they're thinking of
like a boss and an employee where the boss
can fire the employee immediately if they don't have
sex with them. Those are like very extreme power
inequalities. Um, BUT the reality is, first of all,
none of us is ever gonna Fully escape a
world with oppression in it, right? If we wait
around for there to be no oppression in order
to have sex, none of us are ever gonna
get to have sex. But similarly, none of us
ever can be completely Extracted from all power relations,
including with our partner, right? So if we're waiting
around for a partner with whom we have absolutely
equal power and no power differentials, we're never going
to get to have sex because people focus on
things like employment or extreme sexism or whatever, but
there's power inequalities even in things like um You
know, two people are having sex and one of
them has lived in the city for a long
time and has a wide range of friends and
a big support network, and the other one is
new to town and doesn't know anybody. That's already
a power inequality, right? Or, you know, one person's
a little bit wealthier than the other one and
can afford more stuff. That's already a power inequality.
Um, WE can never get out of all power
inequalities, even just like one person is more extroverted
and has less social anxiety than the other person.
That's already a power inequality. So, I think our
job when we're supporting sexual agency is not to
like unrealistically try to end all power inequality. Our
job, much like what I said in the case
of being a little bit drunk or high, is
to think, well, given that, you know, everybody's agency
is always a little bit compromised by these things,
how do we make sure that it's not too
extreme, and then how do we set up support
and scaffolding so that even given this imperfection, people
have agency, right? So, for example, um. As long
as we live in a culture with some measure
of sexism and some measure of misogyny, heterosexual sex
is always going to be across a power inequality
of some sort. But It makes a big difference
if, like what we were talking about, both people
have enough, enough financial independence to end the relationship
if they want to. It makes a big difference
if both people feel physically safe leaving without being
punished for doing so. It makes a big difference
if both people have really good quality communities and
social networks where they can. Turn to if anything
goes wrong or talk through their concerns or just
like. You know, network about how to think about
sex well. All of these things are forms of
support that can compensate for some power inequality and
hold us in our agency despite the fact that
there's always gonna be some power inequality. But I'm
just always very suspicious when I hear people say,
oh well, that wasn't consensual or that wasn't ethical
cause there was a power inequality. Because you could
go through every single person you know and there's
always going to be some power inequalities there, right?
Like we never live in a world of exactly
equal power or like freedom from any form of
oppression. So we got to do the best we
can within that. And the good news is despite
the fact that we live in a world that's
like Fully woven through with power inequalities and imperfections,
we do manage, most of us to have like
a lot of pretty great sex that we really
enjoy and feel good about, right? So the question
is like, you know, so many philosophers of sex
focus on how do we prevent people from being
harmed by bad sex that has, you know, bad
power inequalities, and that is a very important question.
But my focus is more on like Let's look
at those cases where it's good and everybody's having
a great time. And think about like how that
happened and how we can make it happen more
often, and how we can create social conditions where
that can happen more often, just without being some
sort of utopianist or idealist and think, well, OK,
the answer is get rid of patriarchy or get
rid of class inequality or whatever it may be.
That's that would be great, but that's too big
of a job, you know, we want to have
like good sex sooner than that. Yeah, um,
uh, how about, uh, when people, uh, get older
and of course with age, people become usually more
forgetful, their memories don't work as well anymore and
some Sometimes even people develop dementia, so, uh, what,
uh, how should people deal with situations like that
where there's a decreased sense of agency, I guess.
Yeah, and I think it's a really important question
because one thing that people don't often talk about
or even like to think about. IS that older
people tend to be quite sexual. They tend to
have very high libidos. And this idea that is
sort of a myth that has gone through the
culture for a long time that as you get
old, you stop being interested in sex. There's just
not any evidence to back that up. It turns
out that Older people generally have very strong libidos
and in particular, people with dementia. If anything, it
seems that moderate dementia tends to increase people's libidos
and On top of that, people who have moderate
dementia and are still sexually active show um less
depression, less suicidality, um, a slower decline of their
cognitive capacity. So it's like, it's actually good and
important that we try to find ways for older
people and people with some dementia to be able
to keep having agential sex. And this is something
that doesn't get talked about very often at all.
Um, Again, you know. Because I don't want to
be misheard. I want to say this again, just
like I said it in the case of being
a little bit drunk and just as I said
in the case of power relations, if it's too
extreme, there comes a point where you can't do
it anymore, right? Like if somebody really is just
checked out of reality and isn't in a position
to make a self-determined choice of their own because
they don't really know who their partner is or
who they are or what they're agreeing to. Then,
you know, sadly, there's really no room there, I
think, for ethical or agential sex. So at a
certain point when it gets extreme enough, we need
to call a stop to it, and it's a
tricky question to know what, when that is. But
when people are a little bit compromised, a little
bit forgetful, have a little bit of dementia, I
think that we could do so much better at
enabling those people to still have good sex lives.
One of the problems I think, is that, um,
Long-term care facilities, um, either for just people who
are quite old or more specifically for people with
dementia tend to be Spaces that. Don't make any
room for acknowledging that sex is a thing that
the people who live there need or want, right?
They tend to be these very sex negative spaces
where the idea of the people who live there
having sex is treated as unthinkable or disgusting or
obviously nonconsensual. Um, THERE'S no support for their sex
lives, and this is built into the spaces usually,
right? People have no privacy. They either don't have
their own room or they don't have a room
to go to, they don't have doors that lock
and close. We make it kind of physically impossible
for people in those circumstances to have sexual agency,
and they also don't have sexual agency in the
sense that because their existence as sexual beings is
like basically denied by their entire circumstance. They don't
have anyone to go to, to talk to about
STDs, to talk to about worries about sexual assault
and coercion. They just have absolutely no support system,
right? If we treated Older people and people dealing
with dementia as people with sexual needs and desires
that were not disgusting but just a fact of
life, you know, we, we, we could do so
much of a better job at setting up infrastructure
and systems to be like, OK, here's the room
that you can go, you know. Let us know
when you're going there so that somebody can check
in. We could do more education with partners about
how to like check in with their partner to
see if this is a day where they're really
with it or not because people's capacities fluctuate over
time. We also know that people's forgetfulness. Depends a
lot on like literally where they are and how
comfortable they are. So, you know, people tend to
have much better cognitive capacities when they're at home
and comfortable than when they're in a weird circumstance.
So we could increase sexual agency by making sure
that people have those kinds of comfortable spaces that
enhance their capacities. But instead, what we do is
we just Um, out of any of that context,
where like, it's some combination of like, oh, old
having old people having sex is gross. Oh, I
don't want to talk about that. Um, PLUS, oh,
surely old people don't want sex anyway. They're, they're
past that. They're asexual. They're, you know, they're non-sexual
now, so, and asexual, so we don't need to
worry about it, right? Plus, this sort of just
purely precautionary culture of like, we just need to
keep people from having sex cause it would be
bad and non. Consensual without giving people, which is
also, by the way, how we treat teenagers. It's
just like, keep them from having sex. It's, and
in both cases, teenagers and old people, it would
be so much better if we were like giving
them resources for having good ethical sex rather than
just being like, how can we stop them from
doing it? Because they're not going to stop doing
it. Teenagers aren't going to stop doing it. That's
really obvious, right? But also, old people aren't gonna
stop doing it. And that's one we don't think
about as often, but it goes wrong. So, yeah,
so, that was a long-winded answer, but that's my
general set of concerns.
No, that, that's great. So, uh, I, we also
have to talk about, uh, cases where people want
to explore, for example, uh, new kinks. I mean,
how about, uh, expressing uh our agency when doing
that and. I guess, uh, there is some, at
least sometimes uh there are situations where our hesitations
and ambivalence are part of the thrill.
Yes, I think it could be very much part
of the thrill. Yeah, this is sort of a
pet peeve of mine, and this is now a
new topic from, I mean, the last bits of
what we've been talking about have been kind of
similar because I've been emphasizing imperfect agency and the
kind of support for that. Um. This is a,
a very different form of imperfect agency, and this
is a real pet peeve of mine. I think
there's a very strong message out there in the
culture, including in um Parts of the culture that
think of themselves as very sex positive and progressive
that says, you know, maybe means no and all
sex has to be enthusiastic consent, otherwise, it's not
consent at all. This is a very strong message
we get, right, that anything short of Certainty and
maximal enthusiasm should count as a no. And I
think that, um. This is a, I understand why
people say this because they're so worried about nonconsensual
sex or bad sex that they feel like they
need to like put up a wall. But I
think it's really damaging because sex aside, if we
went through our life only doing things that we
were sure we wanted to do, and we were
sure that we would like them, and we knew
how they were gonna turn out. Our lives would
be so tiny and boring, right? I mean, we
would never move to a new city. We would
never have a child. We would never switch careers.
We would never do anything risky. The only reason
The reason that our lives get to expand and
be interesting is because we are willing to take
risks and, and do things that we're ambivalent about
and we're not sure how they're gonna turn out
and maybe they're gonna go badly. Um, SO being
able to try things that, you know, we're not
sure where our limits are, whether we're gonna like
them, is essential to having a full human life.
I'll get back to sex in a moment, but
for me, this is really not a sex-specific point.
The other thing is like sometimes when we're pushing
ourselves in that way, that's really when we feel
most agential and self-expressive and in ourselves, right? Like
that feeling of like pushing our boundaries can be
really empowering. You know, if you're scared to take
a trip to some part of the world you've
never been to, and you do it anyway and
you go off and you have the adventure, like
that's when we feel really agential. And when you
tell people, um, maybe means no, or if it's
not enthusiastic consent, it's not consent. You act as
if doing things that we're unsure of is like
a compromise of our agency. Makes our agency lesser.
And I think often it's quite the opposite, right?
Like we feel most powerful when we're doing stuff
that we feel like we're pushing ourselves and taking
risks. So the question then is like, so first
of all, I think all of that is true
of sex too, right? If you only have sex
that you're like completely certain. What it's gonna be
like and that you want it and that you're
gonna enjoy it. You're never gonna try anything and
your sex life is gonna be very narrow. And
especially in a world with things like homophobia, for
example, right? If you're a kid trying to figure
out if maybe you're queer. Chances are that you're
gonna feel like having your first queer sex is
probably like kind of risky and you're not sure
if you're gonna like it and you don't really
know what that's about. That, it would be like
impossible to come out if we told people, oh,
only do things that you feel absolutely risk-free and
certain about, right? Like we need to explore. So,
I do think exploration is Important, and I think
risk is important for agency and ambivalence and pushing
through ambivalence is important through agency, but All of
that can only be a gent show when. We
have the genuine safety and support to Say yes
or no to it and to like back out
of it if it's not going well, right? So
an analogy I use in the book, which I
really love is imagine that you're not sure if
you want to jump off the high diving board.
Um, That could be really scary, and you could
be really uncertain, right? It could be, it could
be a moment of like real ambivalence. I mean,
I've had this, I'm not with the high diving
board because I'm a baby in water, but even
with the low diving board, I get to the
edge and I'm like, I don't know. Um. If
you get yourself to jump off it, it's probably,
it's not gonna feel like a compromise of your
agency. It's gonna feel like a huge thrill, right?
That you got yourself to do this. Very empowering.
But you can only be a genial about that
decision whether to jump off the diving board. If,
for example, you feel safe walking to the end
and then deciding no and going back, right? Like
if you don't feel like you could change your
mind, you're never gonna get up there in the
first place. Or if you do, it's gonna feel
very coerced. It's not gonna feel agential. To feel
agential about it, you need to feel safe walking
to the end, looking down, and then Making a
decision then and there, am I gonna do this
or am I not gonna do this? And so
you need to have that background, safety and support.
So for example, if there's a bunch of people
sitting at the bottom who are gonna like mock
you and tease you if you don't jump off
it, then that's not agential, right? That doesn't really
give you an exit. Um. To get back to
the sex domain. I think what we need is
not to tell people maybe means no or you
have to be enthusiastic. We need to make space
for people to do things they're unsure about, but
we need to make that really safe for them,
and we need to make them feel like they
really get to express their agency either by doing
it or not doing it, right? And leaving that
open for them, or, or, you know, stopping once
they've started. And we can do that through good
communication. We can do that again by like making
exiting easy. There's lots of steps we can take
to make people feel safe to take risks, um,
but being forced into taking a risk is never
agential. But just as much being prevented from taking
risks is also never agential, right? This is one
of the reasons that I talk a lot in
the book about safe words because You know, one
way of helping people do things that they feel
ambivalent about or risky about is by setting up
a safe word system so that at any moment
they can say, they can opt out and be
like, nope, and there's no consequences and there's no
argument, they're not gonna get in trouble and they're
not gonna disappoint anybody. That's actually another point I
want to fold in, right? One of the big
ways to make, to undermine people's agency when they're
trying something risky. IS to make them feel like
if they don't do it, they're gonna make their
partner disappointed or angry cause that's a lot of
pressure. And conversely, one of the ways of supporting
people in their ability to try things that they're
ambivalent about or feel are risky is to find
mechanisms for insuring them. And making them feel confident
that if they change their mind, nobody's going to
insult them, nobody's gonna be angry at them, nobody's
gonna be disappointed at them, you know, those are,
these are the ways that we can make people
be able to do these things agentially. And it's
really, again, not a sex-specific point. I just think
this is how we should treat one another in
all domains of life. We should make it safe
and possible for people to push themselves and try
things and also Punishment free if they decide that
they're not ready to do it.
Yeah, I, I mean, the, the, the bit you
mentioned about, uh, safe words, it reminded me that
it's something that people, I, I, I mean, I,
I, or I, I guess it is something that
people very commonly use when they practice BDSM, for
example, right? I mean, it's like, OK, I have
this safe word, if I use it, please stop
because this is already too much for me or
something like that, right.
Right. I mean, so I do think it's main
home so far has been in the BDSM community
and that's people's main association. I would describe it
a tiny bit differently than you did, but only
a tiny bit. I think that, you know, the
way that Safe words work. You negotiate them upfront
and you may never need to use them, right,
but the value of having them negotiated upfront is
that what you've agreed is that if somebody uses
one, it's not please stop it or even stop
for this reason. It's just a nice, clean, communicatively
clear way that everybody has decided in advance that
it just stops there. And you don't have to
give a reason, right? Or put it as a
please, and the other person doesn't have to say,
oh, what did I do wrong? Like, are you
sure you want to stop, you know, did I,
did I mess up? It's just, it's designed to
be a very clean, you know, it doesn't always
work. Of course, people sometimes still get angry or
feel guilty or whatever. The world isn't perfect, but
at least ideally it's designed to be a clean,
clear way of being like. I don't need to
give you reasons. You don't need to give me
apologies. We don't need any negotiation here. We're just
done. We don't, we're out, right? And that's a
really powerful thing to be able to do because
normally, if you're doing something with somebody and you
want to stop. It's a whole stressful negotiation because
we're all so worried, especially when it comes to
something as intimate and vulnerable as sex. We're all
worried about like hurting the other person's feelings or
disappointing them or whatever. So we don't want to
just be like, no, stop, right? It's always like.
Um, ACTUALLY starting to feel a little uncomfortable, and
then the other person's like, oh, I'm sorry, did
I do something wrong? And it's like a whole
long negotiation, right? And the beauty of safe words
is you can just like they, they, they're not
supposed to have any of that interpersonal or moral
baggage. It's just like we're done. And the point
is, like, yes, you're right, the home is in
BDSM, but I just think this is so valuable
as a way of doing so many different things,
right? So like I am very scared of heights,
um. I get a lot of vertigo, but sometimes
I like to do things that involve heights, and
I always, I don't always make a big official
deal out of it, but when I'm doing it
with somebody, I sort of do the equivalent of
establishing a safe word with them, right? I'm like,
I want to tell you in advance. That I
may need to just end this, and it doesn't
mean you did anything wrong, and I don't want
to have to give you my reasons. It just
might be too much for me, so like. You
know, if I say I'm done, then I'm done,
right? And that helps a lot in because otherwise
you're like up there and you're like, oh, I
think I may need to turn around, and the
other person's like, no, no, you can do it,
and oh, I'm sorry, did I make you do
something you didn't want to do? It's just so
much cleaner to just be able to have a
safe word and be like, I really did want
to try this. Turns out, no, I'm done, it's
over. And I think it would be so fantastic
if we taught. Like little tiny kids about safe
words, obviously not for sex purposes, but like from
the very beginning, like so that they could try
things that they don't, that they're not sure that
they're up for and have a safe way of
getting out of it, you know, like with a
3 year old. Do you want to go to
a birthday party? I don't know. Sounds scary, maybe
fun, right? Give them a safe word. The minute
they say that safe word, they get to go
home. They don't have to have a meltdown. They
don't need to justify why they want to leave.
The parent isn't gonna try to talk them into
staying past that, you know, it's like, OK, we'll
go to the party. And when you say this
word, we'll leave and we're done. And then they
can try things that they might not have wanted
to try before. They might have been anxious or
stressed out about trying, or like eating a new
food that they might want to try, but they
don't know if they like it, right? It's very
stressful and anxious even for little kids to try
things that they're not sure about, and we should
be giving them what I like to think of
as tools for agency, like safe words just are
a good example, but there's many. Right. Tools for
agency where they grow up having scaffolding and tools
and, and tricks available to them for how to
be more agential. I just think this would be
fantastic across the board.
Mhm. So earlier we talked about the issue of
power dynamics, but even in just, uh, let's say
everyday sex, I mean sex among, er, I mean
people, partners, couples, whatever, I, I mean of course
there are. Are usually are very commonly differences when
it comes to enthusiasm, even when it comes to
experience, is that something that you also consider in
your approach to sex? I mean how, uh, perhaps
some of that might uh play a role in
how we should consider consensuality or not?
Um, So just so I make sure I'm understanding
the question, is, is the question about whether it,
it is like a compromise or a problem for
consensuality that in everyday sex there are going to
be these little differences in enthusiasm and experience and
so far, yeah. Yeah, I mean, I don't think
it's inherently a problem, no, because Like I said,
because I'm such a non-deal theorist about this stuff,
because I never think that agency is perfect or
encounters are perfect. I think small inequalities are not
intrinsically problematic as long as everybody. Involved, you know,
as long as there's basic consensuality in the sense
that we talked about before where people are communicating
each other that they're doing what they want and
as long as everybody involved has basic agency, not
perfect agency, but you know, basic agency, um, but
I do think, of course, that what often happens
with everyday sex, as you put it, or long-term
relationships that aren't especially. Kinky or edgy or whatever
is that people can fall into a pattern where
the difference always goes the same way, you know,
where it's always one person who's more enthusiastic, it's
always one person who has more power, and then
that could be a problem. I don't think it's
necessarily a problem for consensuality. But it's definitely a
problem within a relationship in the sense that, you
know, you're, you start to entrench that inequality over
time and it becomes a fundamental part of the
dynamic. So I don't think it's a problem if
you've got a couple and you know, Sometimes when
they, you know, again, let's just assume a long-term
couple having relatively vanilla everyday sex. I sometimes they
might both be incredibly enthusiastic and into it. And
then sometimes one of them is really enthusiastic and
the other one is like, all right, you know,
sure, not a terrible idea. It'll make my partner
happy, no problem. And then another time it goes
the other way and it's the other partner who's
a little less enthusiastic. I think all of that
is part of the like. Normal ebb and flow
of a relationship. But if you find yourself in
a situation where one person is always feeling like
they're doing it as a favor to the other
person and it's only the one person who's enthusiastic
or if, you know, everything that Happens during sex
is catering to the slightly more powerful person's desires,
then I think the problem there is less with
consensuality and more just that that's a bad relationship,
you know, that's, that's, that's just not how you
want your relationship to go. And, and, and my
advice to people in that situation is to sort
of take a reflective step back and think about
like, How can we make this not exactly equal,
but how can we make it so that there's
more of an ebb and flow of who's more
excited and who's more in control and who's having
their relate their needs met. And I think one
of the problems we have as a culture is
that um Especially among kind of like monogamous heterosexual
vanilla couples. It's not just that they don't talk
about sex a lot, but that talking about sex
is almost stigmatized. Like you're not supposed to do
it. It's like, it means you must have a
problem or you're being a little bit vulgar or
it's not so sexy, right? Like the ideal, and
I find this a very weird ideal as somebody
who talks constantly and can't shut up. Um, BUT
the ideal is like you're supposed to just like
do it and not talk about it, right? Otherwise,
there's a problem. Um. Whereas if you move to
like a queer context or a kinky context or
a poly context, in those contexts, people are talking
about it constantly, partly because they can't just like
Internalize the most mainstream norms of the culture and
just kind of go along with the flow, they
have to talk about it because there, there isn't
just sort of like conformist scripts sitting there for
them to fall into and adopt, right? So they
have to be having discussions about what do we
want, how do we treat each other, what kind
of relationship do we have? So I think unfortunately,
you know, people who are in very kind of
everyday traditional heterosexual relationships, they're often not pushed to
talk about it and in fact discouraged from doing
so. And that's a real disadvantage they have compared
to other kinds of couples. So, my advice in
those cases is like they need to find a
way of getting some sort of critical distance from
their own sex lives and getting over the idea
that talking is bad. And actually like have conversations
about how do we make this more interesting for
both of us? How do we make this more
equal for both of us. It's not gonna happen
on its own.
Right. So, Doctor Kuchler, we're reaching our time limit,
so I would like to just ask you one
final question. So, I mean, would you, would you
like to perhaps leave one final message about your
book? I mean, uh, If you were to summarize
uh what you would like people to take from
your book in terms of, uh, your approach to
sex, what would, uh, how would you do it?
That's a great question. Um, I think, um, If
I can cheat and give myself to. 2 hotshots.
Um, THERE'S 2 things I really want people to
take from the book. One is We've spent a
whole lot of time in our culture from both
the right and the left, from very diff various
different perspectives talking about how to try to prevent
bad sex from happening, how to prevent rape, how
to prevent unwanted sex, and that's all very important,
and I'm not putting a stop to it, and
we need to do it, but we also need
to spend time talking about how to have good
sex. We are not as a culture given any
tools, language tools, or other kinds of tools, or
even good infrastructure to help us understand how to
have good sex. And that's just like a huge
missing half of the conversation. Avoiding bad sex is
great, but we want to have Great sex, we
want to have pleasurable sex, and so we need
to be explicit both in philosophy and elsewhere about
like, well, how do we do that? What does
it mean? What, how do we get there, right?
So my emphasis, I'm, you know, I, I'm, I'm
not somebody who is discarding the importance of preventing
bad sex, but what I want to contribute is
the beginning of some real conversations about how to
have good sex. That's one point. And then the
second point that's just as important to me that
I want to get out of this is that
having good sex and avoiding bad sex and having
sexual agency is never going to be something that
we do on our own or even just in
conversation with a partner. It's always going to be
something that requires social support and social change. It's
about having Legal systems and material spaces and economic
systems, and cultural resources and scripts around us that
support. Good sex and a gentle sex, and our
ability to have a gentle sex, right? Like one
of the things that I talk about in the
book is you could have two people with exactly
the same intentions and desires to have gay sex,
and they're both well-intentioned, and if they're doing it
in a country where gay sex is illegal and
nobody talks about it and they have no resources
and then they have no support. Their sex is
not going to be agential. If they're having that
same sex in like, you know, their queer commune
in the middle of a big liberal city, it's
gonna be highly agential. It's not about their communication
with each other or their own desires or their
own intention to treat each other well, right? So
it's just as important to me to like shift
seeing sexual agency and good sex to the level
of society. And seeing it as a social justice
issue and a social structures issue and emphasizing less
individual capacities and individual conversations and really trying to
broaden that conversation. So those are really the two
things that are most important to me to get
out of this.
Great, so the book is again Sex Beyond Yes,
Pleasure and Agency for Everyone. I will be leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview, and would you like to just tell people
apart from the book where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Oh yeah, that's a, that's a great uh question.
So, um, I'll say a few things really quickly.
Um, I have a website which is www. Quilrcuula
just by name.xyz and it has lots of my
writings and also information about um various places that
I'm speaking. Um, I have some online discussions about
this on YouTube. Um, I'm also, if by any
chance people happen to be in the, um, Baltimore,
Washington, DC area later this month, I'm gonna be
giving a couple of very public lectures on, um,
February 23rd in Baltimore and February 24th in DC.
The series is called Profs and Pints. You could
look that up and those will be very much
accessible lectures for Anyone, not just philosophers, anyone who
wants to come talk to me about good sex.
Um, AND yeah, I'm kind of everywhere. I've been
giving talks and podcasts and so on around the
world lately, um, but my, um, website is a
great place to find them, but the most immediate
thing is that I'm hoping that people who are
in the right area would consider coming to the
DC and Baltimore talks because those will be really
fun.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Yes, thank you so much. It's a great conversation.
I appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.